{'content': "XoxF Acts as the Predominant Methanol Dehydrogenase in the Type I Methanotroph Methylomicrobium buryatense.\n\nMany methylotrophic taxa harbor two distinct methanol dehydrogenase (MDH) systems for oxidizing methanol to formaldehyde: the well-studied calcium-dependent MxaFI type and the more recently discovered lanthanide-containing XoxF type. MxaFI has traditionally been accepted as the major functional MDH in bacteria that contain both enzymes. However, in this study, we present evidence that, in a type I methanotroph, Methylomicrobium buryatense, XoxF is likely the primary functional MDH in the environment. The addition of lanthanides increases xoxF expression and greatly reduces mxa expression, even under conditions in which calcium concentrations are almost 100-fold higher than lanthanide concentrations. Mutations in genes encoding the MDH enzymes validate our finding that XoxF is the major functional MDH, as XoxF mutants grow more poorly than MxaFI mutants under unfavorable culturing conditions. In addition, mutant and transcriptional analyses demonstrate that the lanthanide-dependent MDH switch operating in methanotrophs is mediated in part by the orphan response regulator MxaB, whose gene transcription is itself lanthanide responsive.\nAerobic methanotrophs, bacteria that oxidize methane for carbon and energy, require a methanol dehydrogenase enzyme to convert methanol into formaldehyde. The calcium-dependent enzyme MxaFI has been thought to primarily carry out methanol oxidation in methanotrophs. Recently, it was discovered that XoxF, a lanthanide-containing enzyme present in most methanotrophs, can also oxidize methanol. In a methanotroph with both MxaFI and XoxF, we demonstrate that lanthanides transcriptionally control genes encoding the two methanol dehydrogenases, in part by controlling expression of the response regulator MxaB. Lanthanides are abundant in the Earth's crust, and we demonstrate that micromolar amounts of lanthanides are sufficient to suppress MxaFI expression. Thus, we present evidence that XoxF acts as the predominant methanol dehydrogenase in a methanotroph.\n\nPMID:26858104", 'saved_to': None, 'truncated': False}
